
--- Page 1 ---
©ReptiFiles® — Where Better Reptile Care Begins 
 
African Fat-Tailed Gecko (Hemitheconyx caudicinctus) 
Difficulty: Intermediate 
 
African fat-tailed geckos are 8-10" lizards with soft, almost "pudgy" appearance: a long, stout body, 
stubby limbs, an oval head, pebbled skin, and a plump, segmented tail. Their coloring features 
alternating bands of medium and dark brown, sometimes with dark spots and white markings, including 
a white stripe from head to tail. Although they are geckos, they are unique from most others in that they 
have eyelids and can't walk up walls 
African fat-tailed geckos are native to West Africa, ranging from Senegal to northern Cameroon. They 
prefer dry Sahel and dry/moist savannah for habitat, and are generally found near rock crevices and 
among the leaf litter of dry forests.  
African-fat tailed geckos generally have very docile, tolerant dispositions and can make very handleable 
pet lizards. If you pay attention to providing excellent African fat-tailed gecko care, your pet is likely to 
enjoy a 15-20 year lifespan, although longer is possible.  
Shopping List 
Information on how to use these items with your pet and why they’re necessary can be found in the rest 
of this care sheet. 
 
Front-opening 36” x 18” x 18” glass terrarium 
 
50w halogen heat bulb 
 
5.5” dome lamp with ceramic socket 
 
8” x 12” heat mat 
 
Non-proportional (on/off) thermostat 
 
12” Arcadia ShadeDweller 7% UVB kit 
 
Plug-in light timer 
 
Digital thermometer/hygrometer (x2) 
 
23-46 quarts naturalistic substrate 
 
Flagstone (at least 1 piece) 
 
Hides/caves (at least 2) 
 
Misc. décor (leaf litter, logs, cork flats, live/artificial plants, ledges, etc.) 
 
Pressure sprayer 
 
Food and water dishes 
 
Calcium and vitamin supplement 
Housing 
African fat-tailed geckos may seem small, but they still need an enclosure that is large enough to give 
them adequate opportunity to explore, hunt, and generally exercise natural behaviors. They are also 
terrestrial, which means that they are a ground-dwelling species, and generally prefer terrariums that 
are wider than they are tall. 


--- Page 2 ---
©ReptiFiles® — Where Better Reptile Care Begins 
 
This is why the minimum recommended enclosure size for a single African fat-tailed gecko is 36”L x 
18”W x 18”H / 90 x 45 x 45cm. If possible, larger is always better! Although they are considered 
terrestrial, African fat-tailed geckos are built to live amongst rocks, and are capable climbers. 
Can multiple African fat-tailed geckos be housed in the same enclosure? 
This species is generally considered to be solitary, and does not appear to live in groups in the wild. A 
pair can be successfully housed together in a large enough enclosure, but keep in mind that if the geckos 
don’t get along, they can fight and severely injure one another. Males in particular are known to fight. 
Altogether, it's best to house only one gecko per enclosure. 
Lighting & UVB 
African fat-tailed geckos are nocturnal, which means that they are primarily active at night.  This means 
that they are likely to prefer cooler temperatures, are exposed to low levels of indirect UVB during the 
day, and have exceptional night vision. 
All lights should be turned off at night. You can use a 12/12 day/night cycle, or you can vary day length 
seasonally to encourage more natural hormonal rhythms. If you choose to do the latter, lights should be 
on for up to 13 hours/day during summer, and down to 11 hours/day during winter, with gradual 
increments in-between. 
UVB Lighting 
African fat-tailed geckos are capable of surviving without UVB lighting as long as they receive a high-D3 
calcium supplement, but they are most likely to thrive when UVB is provided. In order to get the right 
strength of UVB (measured by UV Index, or UVI), distance and obstructions must be considered. The 
below recommendations assume that the lamp is placed on top of the enclosure, not inside: 
 
Arcadia ShadeDweller 7% — 8-12" / 20-30cm 
 
Zoo Med T5 HO ReptiSun 5.0 — 14-20" / 35-50cm 
For best results, use an Arcadia or Vivarium Electronics brand T5 HO fixture. The UVB lamp should be 
installed on the warm side of the enclosure, overlapping with the heat lamp, because heat and UVB 
work together. The UVB lamp itself should span no more than half the enclosure's length. 
(These recommendations are approximations. It is strongly recommended to use a Solarmeter 6.5 to determine the 
best placement to achieve a UVI of 1.0-2.0 in the basking area.) 
Heating 
Humans are warm-blooded, which means that our body temperature is automatically regulated. African 
fat-tailed geckos, however, are cold-blooded, which means that they have to move between areas of 
different temperatures to regulate their body temperature. In the wild, African fat-tailed geckos warm 
up during the day by sleeping in a warm burrow. In captivity, the best way to replicate the warming 
effects of sunlight is with a heat lamp, possibly supplemented (but not replaced) by a heat mat. 
RAINY/WARM SEASON (April-October) 
 
Warm hide: 90-94°F (32-34°C) 
 
Cool side: 72-77°F (22-25°C) 
 
Nighttime: 72-77°F (22-25°C) 


--- Page 3 ---
©ReptiFiles® — Where Better Reptile Care Begins 
 
DRY/COOL SEASON (November-March) 
 
Warm hide: 79°F (26°C) 
 
Cool side: 68-74°F (20-23°C) 
 
Nighttime: 17-18°F (63-64°C) 
Generally speaking, a ~50w halogen heat bulb or two should be plenty for achieving the desired 
temperatures in your African fat-tailed gecko terrarium. However, if you notice that the warm hide is 
too warm, dial down the heat with a plug-in lamp dimmer or switch to a lower wattage bulb. If the 
general air temperature is too cool, try adding another or higher-wattage heat bulb. 
Creating the Basking Area 
Place one of the hides (I prefer a rectangular black box hide for this) directly under the heat lamp(s) and 
place a light-colored slab of stone (ex: flagstone, sandstone) or hardwood on top to create a basking 
platform. The hide underneath will be the warm hide. The heat lamp should be able to heat the warm 
hide to the target temperature, but this can vary depending on room temperature, thickness of the 
basking surface, etc. 
If your warm hide is not getting warm enough: add a heat mat under the hide box, covered with 1” of 
substrate to prevent direct contact. Plug this heat mat in to a thermostat such as the Inkbird brand. 
Place the thermostat probe inside the warm hide to regulate its temperature correctly. For best results, 
schedule your heat mat to turn off a few hours after sunset rather than immediately at sunset to 
replicate that lingering-warmth effect nocturnal reptiles benefit from in the wild!  
Tracking Temperature 
To track the temperatures in your enclosure, use digital probe thermometers. For basking temps, place a 
temperature probe on the basking surface under the heat source. For the rest of the enclosure, place 
another temp probe on the substrate of the cool end. Most reptile-brand digital probe thermometers 
function well. 
Humidity 
African fat-tailed geckos do best in an environment that cycles between wet/warm and dry/cool 
seasons. During the wet season (summer), shoot for 70-80% daytime and 100% nighttime. During the 
dry season (winter), shoot for 50% daytime and 70-75% nighttime. To increase humidity levels in the 
enclosure, use a handheld pressure sprayer. Distilled or reverse osmosis water works best if you want to 
avoid water spots. 
It is also important to your gecko’s health to provide them with consistent access to an area of higher 
humidity. This can be done with a “humid hide” — a cave or hide with moistened substrate, placed on 
the cool end of the enclosure. This helps your gecko shed successfully and stay hydrated. Keep the 
humidity levels in this hide around the same as your current target nighttime humidity. 
You can monitor humidity levels in your humid hide with a digital probe hygrometer with the probe 
placed in the middle. You will need another device if you want to monitor the humid hide separately. 
Substrate 
Providing substrate for African fat-tailed geckos is a bit of a controversial issue, but the short of it is that 
as long as a naturalistic substrate is used, and the gecko is adequately heated, hydrated, has access to 


--- Page 4 ---
©ReptiFiles® — Where Better Reptile Care Begins 
 
UVB, and is otherwise healthy, there’s nothing to be worried about. Note: New African fat-tailed geckos 
should be >6 months old and must pass quarantine before naturalistic substrate is added to their 
enclosure. Before then, use paper towels or blue shop towels. 
For African fat-tailed geckos, it’s best to use a well-draining, naturalistic substrate that is similar to what 
is found in their native habitat. This substrate should be layered at least 4" deep to allow for burrowing 
behavior. Here are some good options: 
Substrate options: DIY semi-arid mix (40% organic topsoil + 40% play sand + 20% Zoo Med Excavator 
Clay), Lugarti Natural Reptile Bedding, Zoo Med ReptiSand, Exo Terra Desert/Riverbed Sand, Exo Terra 
Stone Desert 
Feces and urates should be removed daily, and contaminated substrate should be scooped out and 
replaced. Substrate should be completely replaced once every 3-6 months, depending on how diligent 
you are about daily cleaning. 
Décor 
Decorations play a vital role in your African fat-tailed gecko’s enclosure as environmental enrichment. 
Enrichment items encourage exercise, stimulate your pet’s natural instincts, and help promote overall 
wellbeing. And, of course, they make the enclosure look nicer! Without décor, your gecko’s terrarium is 
just an expensive box of dirt. 
Hollow logs, thick branches, leaf litter, ledges, and artificial or drought-resistant live plants work well as 
décor in an African fat-tailed gecko terrarium. You can also provide additional hideouts.  Arrange these 
items in a way that encourages your gecko to climb and explore, and provides a variety of places to 
sleep or shelter in during the day. 
Food 
African fat-tailed geckos are insectivores, which means that they eat insects. How often an African fat-
tailed gecko needs to depends on age: The general rule is to offer 2 appropriately-sized bugs per 1 inch 
of your gecko’s length, or however much they can eat in 15 minutes. Juveniles should be fed daily, and 
young adults fed every other day/every 3 days. Adults whose tail is fatter than their neck can be fed 
every 5 days. 
Feeder insect options: crickets, dubia roach nymphs, discoid roach nymphs, black soldier fly larvae, 
mealworms, darkling beetles, hornworms, silkworms, grasshoppers/locusts 
The key to providing a healthy, balanced diet for your pet is VARIETY. Provide as varied of a diet as you 
possibly can, and you will be rewarded with a healthier pet that always looks forward to mealtime. 
Supplements 
All insect feeders should be lightly “dusted” with calcium powder to balance the calcium-phosphorus 
ratio. Multivitamin powder can be used every once in a while to provide extra nutrients. All-in-one 
powders provide a balanced dose of both at once. 
There are many options in terms of supplements, but Repashy CalciumPlus LoD and Arcadia EarthProA 
are both solid all-in-one supplements for African fat-tailed geckos that have appropriate UVB. For best 
results, use as directed by the label.  
