
--- Page 1 ---
Care For Us
Water Monitor Lizard (Varanus salvator)


--- Page 2 ---
Animal Welfare
Animal welfare refers to an animal’s 
state or feelings. An animal’s welfare 
state can be positive, neutral or negative. 
An animal’s welfare has the potential to 
differ on a daily basis. When an animal’s 
needs - nutritional, behavioural, health 
and environmental - are met, they will 
have a good standard of welfare.  
A good life in captivity might be one 
where animals can consistently 
experience good welfare - throughout  
their entire life.  


--- Page 3 ---
Understanding that animals 
have both sentient and 
cognitive abilities as well as 
pain perception, reinforces 
the need to provide 
appropriate husbandry 
provisions for all captive 
animals, to ensure positive 
welfare.
In captivity, the welfare of an 
animal is dependent on the 
environment provided for 
them and the daily care and 
veterinary treatment they 
receive. 


--- Page 4 ---
Water monitor lizards can be found in parts of 
south and southeast Asia. Adults rarely grow 
beyond 1.5 – 2metres but males can grow larger 
than females, reaching breeding size at just 
40cm long. They are primarily a solitary species 
unless resource competition is very high.
Water monitor lizards are powerfully built with 
a long tail which can be used to defend  
themselves from predators. They also have 
strong jaws and serrated teeth to help them 
predate and consume their food. They are 
carnivorous.
Being excellent swimmers, they are classed as 
semi-aquatic but are also excellent tree climbers.
They are a heavily traded lizard, used primarily 
for their skin, in the pet trade and sometimes for 
meat. This can lead to a decline in healthy 
population numbers but currently the 
population remains stable.


--- Page 5 ---
Water monitors are well adapted to 
using water, especially as an escape 
from predators. They like to explore 
their environment through climbing 
around it, digging into it and swimming 
between places. Their claws make them 
excellent climbers, and their tails are 
used as paddles when swimming.
Positive Behaviours to Encourage
To make their enclosure more 
interesting for them, give them rocks 
and branches to climb on as well as 
varying substrates to dig into. This will 
also be useful to wear their claws down 
naturally. A large area of water will also 
give the lizard choice to bathe or swim if 
desired.
Water monitors like to 
explore


--- Page 6 ---
Monitor lizards like to 
hunt and forage
Water monitor lizards like to actively hunt 
prey and use their powerful muscles to tear 
into large carcasses. They will also eat carrion  
and insects so will forage for smaller food 
items within an enclosure too. They are 
intelligent and like to explore complex 
environments for food. They also use their 
highly developed sense of smell to search for 
food.
Positive Behaviours to Encourage
Anchoring large pieces of meat to one place 
and whole carcass feeding where possible will 
encourage hunting and muscular usage. Hiding 
smaller pieces of meat around an enclosure, 
and the use of puzzle feeders will stimulate 
foraging behaviours and cognitive use.


--- Page 7 ---
Monitors lizards can get 
diseases
Monitor lizards can get a disease called 
metabolic bone disease where the internal 
skeleton, particularly the spine becomes 
brittle, crooked and painful. This can be 
due to a lack of calcium within the diet 
coupled with a lack of vitamin D from 
sunlight or basking opportunities.
Positive Behaviours to Encourage
Keeping monitor lizards in an enclosure 
with various basking spots means that the 
lizard can choose where they want to bask 
as well as getting enough exposure to 
vitamin D and UV rays from specialist 
lighting. Supplementing the diet with 
calcium powder will help with mineral 
imbalances.


--- Page 8 ---
Monitors have a good 
sense of smell.
Monitor lizards have an advanced sense of 
smell which is explored through their 
forked tongue. Each fork helps to sense 
the direction of a smell and the tongue is 
brought back into the mouth to be 
assessed by a specialised organ. Their 
sense of smell helps them to locate food 
and communicate with others.
Positive Behaviours to Encourage
Providing scent trails can be a good way 
to encourage monitor lizards to use their 
sense of smell to explore their habitat and 
locate food. Scattering food items around 
an enclosure will also promote the use of 
this behaviour. Harsh chemicals can have 
a negative impact on a monitor lizards' 
sense of smell and should be avoided.


--- Page 9 ---
Monitor Lizards need to shed 
their skin
Lizards naturally slough off their skin but need the 
right conditions to have a successful shed. Shedding 
helps rid lizards of external parasites and ensure 
scales are healthy. The lizard will need to shed 
more whilst it is still growing and less as an adult. 
Health checks of lizards should always include 
observations of skin health and shedding progress, 
including in places such as inside the ear and 
nostrils. Sheds can sometimes get stuck in these 
places and may need to be manually removed.
Positive Behaviours to Encourage 
Access to water to bathe in helps soften the old skin 
and rocks or logs to rub on helps slough it off. 
Damp substrates such as soil and mulch can 
provide some relief for itching whist sloughing is in 
progress.


--- Page 10 ---
Monitor lizards need a 
specialised environment
Water monitor lizards  are very active and 
wide ranging. They require appropriate 
lighting, temperatures between 220C and 
300C and high humidity within their habitats. 
Temperatures should be gradients between 
an ideal maximum and minimum 
temperature to allow for choice. There should 
be furniture within the enclosure such as 
vegetation, substrates and log tunnels for the 
lizard to hide from view if desired. 
Positive Behaviours to Encourage 
A large and complex environment with a  
range of temperatures, basking spots, high 
humidity and enclosure furniture (which is 
often changed and moved) should encourage 
choice, exploration and investigation within 
the enclosure.


--- Page 11 ---
Water monitor 
lizards enjoy
A suitable environment that promotes 
all their natural behaviours, an 
appropriate diet presented in a 
stimulating way and the opportunity 
to experience choice within their 
environment.
In captivity we should always try and 
replicate their natural and normal 
behaviours, so they are happy and 
healthy throughout their lives.
