
--- Page 1 ---
©ReptiFiles® — Where Better Reptile Care Begins 
 
Leachie Gecko (Rhacodactylus leachianus) 
Difficulty: Intermediate 
 
Leachie geckos (Rhacodactylus leachianus) are a nocturnal, omnivorous, arboreal lizard native to the 
islands of Grande Terre and Isle of Pines in New Caledonia, as well as certain small nearby islands. 
Grande Terre is the territory of R. l. leachianus, while Isle of Pines is home to R. l. henkeli. Their 
preferred habitat is the forest canopy, descending rarely. 
Leachie geckos are the largest geckos in the world, with the R. l. leachianus growing 14-17″ / 36-43cm 
long and R. l. henkeli averaging 9-12″ / 23-30cm long. They have a large triangular head, blunt snout, 
lidless eyes, vertical pupils, loose velvety skin, sticky toe pads with claws, and a short tail. They have a 
mottled pattern that gives the impression of moss or lichen, but coloring varies by subspecies. R. l. 
henkeli is the most colorful, with green, brown, gray, white, orange, and pink on their color palette. 
Meanwhile, R. l. leachianus sticks to brown, black, and gray. 
Like other New Caledonian geckos, leachie geckos are fairly easy to care for, as far as reptiles go. When 
you pay attention to providing appropriate leachie gecko care, you may expect a lifespan of 20-30 years. 
Shopping List 
• 
Front-opening 48”L x 24”W x 48”H terrarium 
• 
40w incandescent heat lamp, x2 
• 
5.5” dome lamp fixture, x2 
• 
Rheostat 
• 
22” Zoo Med or Arcadia T5 HO forest UVB bulb 
• 
24” Arcadia or Vivarium Electronics T5 HO hood 
• 
Power strip with digital timer 
• 
Digital thermometer/hygrometer with probes, x2 
• 
Pressure sprayer 
• 
Coconut fiber substrate, 60qts 
• 
Environmental enrichment 
o artificial or (nontoxic) live foliage 
o thick vines 
o branches 
o cork hollows 
o magnetic ledges 
• 
Magnetic gecko ledge, large 
• 
Gecko cups, 1oz 
• 
Crested gecko meal replacement powder (Leapin’ Leachie, Pangea, Repashy) 
• 
Calcium powder, no D3 
 


--- Page 2 ---
©ReptiFiles® — Where Better Reptile Care Begins 
 
Housing 
Leachie geckos are quite active, and require an enclosure that is large enough to give them adequate 
opportunity to explore, hunt, and generally exercise natural behaviors. They are also arboreal, which 
means that they are a tree-dwelling species, and need a terrarium that provides a generous amount of 
climbing space. Where possible, larger is always better! 
• 
The minimum recommended enclosure size for R. l. leachianus is 48”L x 24”W x 48”H / 120 x 60 
x 120 cm or equivalent. 
• 
The minimum recommended enclosure size for R. l. henkeli is 36”L x 18”W x 36”H / 90 x 45 x 90 
cm or equivalent. 
Can multiple leachie geckos be housed in the same enclosure? 
It’s best not to house multiple leachie geckos together. 
Lighting & UVB 
Leachie geckos are nocturnal, which means that they are primarily active at night. This means that they 
are likely to prefer cooler temperatures, are exposed to low levels of indirect UVB during the day, and 
have exceptional night vision. 
At minimum, lighting should be provided for 12 hours/day. However, if you wish to provide seasonal 
cycles to stimulate natural hormonal cycling, you can either manual switch between 14 hours/day 
during summer and 10 hours/day during winter, or use a smart timer such as Kasa to sync your lights 
with your local sunrise and sunset times. 
UVB Lighting 
Leachie geckos are capable of surviving without UVB lighting as long as they get a certain amount of 
dietary vitamin D3, but they can’t thrive unless it is provided as part of their environment. UVB lighting 
can be tricky, because in order to get the right strength of UVB (measured by UV Index, or UVI), distance 
must be considered. 
As a rough estimate, to provide appropriate UVB to a leachie gecko in a 36-48” tall enclosure, you will 
need one 22″ Zoo Med T5 HO Reptisun 5.0 or Arcadia Forest 6% UVB bulb in an Arcadia or Vivarium 
Electronics fixture for best results. Place the basking branch so the gecko can’t get closer than 9-12” 
below the lamp. 
(These recommendations are approximations. It is strongly recommended to use a Solarmeter 6.5 to 
determine the best placement to achieve a UVI of 2.0-3.0 in the basking area at the top of the enclosure.) 
Heating 
Humans are warm-blooded, which means that our body temperature is automatically regulated. Leachie 
geckos, however, are cold-blooded, and they need to move between areas of different temperatures in 
order to regulate their body temperature. In the wild, leachie geckos depend on sunlight for the warmth 
they need. In captivity, sunlight can be replicated with a white incandescent heat lamp. 
• 
Basking area temperature: 86-88°F (30-31°C) 
• 
Ambient temperature: 72-78°F (22-26°C) 
• 
Nighttime temperature: 66-72°F (19-22°C) 


--- Page 3 ---
©ReptiFiles® — Where Better Reptile Care Begins 
 
A cluster of two 40w white incandescent bulbs such as the Exo Terra Daytime Heat Lamp should be 
plenty to achieve the basking temperatures that you need for a leachie gecko. However, exact results 
will vary based on your room temperature. If you notice that the basking area is too warm, dial down 
the heat down with a rheostat or switch to lower wattage bulbs. If your basking area is too cool, you will 
need higher wattage bulbs. 
The basking area should be a sturdy branch directly under the heat lamp. Because your leachie gecko is 
arboreal and will be living in a tall enclosure, the warmest temperatures will be at the top (near the heat 
lamp), and the coolest temperatures will be toward the bottom. You will need thick vines, branches, and 
foliage at all levels to allow for proper thermoregulation. Leachie geckos are very sensitive to heat 
stress, and require access to areas of cooler temperatures in order to stay healthy! 
To track basking temperature, use a digital probe thermometer, with the probe zip-tied to the basking 
surface under the heat source. Most reptile-brand digital probe thermometers function well. 
Humidity 
Leachie geckos do best in a high-humidity environment, with an average humidity of 60-80% as 
measured by a digital probe hygrometer with the probe placed in the middle of the enclosure. Humidity 
levels that are consistently too high or low can cause health problems for your gecko. However, it is 
natural for humidity to be lower in the warm area and higher in the cool area. It is also normal and 
healthy for humidity levels to rise at night and fall during the day. Levels as low as 50% during the day 
and 100% at night are fine. 
To raise the humidity in your gecko’s enclosure (and provide an extra source of drinking water), use a 
pump-style pressure sprayer such as the Exo Terra Mister to wet down the enclosure every evening, and 
again in the morning if needed. Alternatively, you can automate this process by installing an automatic 
misting system such as Mistking. 
Substrate 
Because leachie geckos are arboreal (tree-dwelling), they don’t spend much time on the ground. 
Although it’s not necessary to use bedding for them, it’s very useful for helping to stabilize humidity. It 
also acts as a cushion if they fall from their perch, which does happen occasionally. 
It’s best to use a moisture-retentive substrate that is similar to the soil in a leachie gecko’s natural 
habitat. Here are some reliable options: Lugarti Natural Reptile Bedding, Zoo Med Reptisoil, Zoo Med 
Eco Earth, Exo Terra Plantation Soil, The Bio Dude Terra Fauna bioactive kit. Alternatively, you can create 
your own tropical mix with 60% organic topsoil, 40% coconut fiber. 
For best results, add a generous layer of leaf litter on top. 
Feces and urates should be removed daily, and contaminated substrate should be scooped out and 
replaced. Substrate should be completely replaced once every 3-4 months, depending on your needs.  
Décor 
Decorations play a vital role in your gecko’s enclosure as environmental enrichment. Enrichment items 
encourage exercise, stimulate your pet’s natural instincts, and help promote overall wellbeing. And, of 
course, they make the enclosure look nicer! Without décor, your terrarium is just a glass box with dirt 


--- Page 4 ---
©ReptiFiles® — Where Better Reptile Care Begins 
 
and a feeding ledge. Just because leachie geckos can climb up glass doesn’t mean they shouldn’t have 
other climbing materials available. They also need places to hide that are not on the ground. 
Branches, braided vines, magnetic ledges, cork hollows, and live or artificial foliage work well as décor in 
a leachie gecko terrarium. Arrange these items in a way that encourages your gecko to climb and 
explore, and provides a variety of options for places to sleep during the day. 
Food 
Leachie geckos are omnivores, which means that they need a balanced diet of both plant- and animal-
based foods to get the nutrition that they need. In the wild, they eat mostly fruit and insects. How often 
leachie geckos need to eat in captivity depends on age: 
• 
Juveniles (0-12 months) — CGD daily, insects every other day 
• 
Adults (>12 months) — CGD every other day, insects 1-2x/week 
Crested gecko diet (CGD) must be offered via a wall-mounted feeding ledge, not placed on the ground. 
Personally I prefer magnets to suction cups. 
Best crested gecko diet powders: Pangea, Repashy, Black Panther Zoological, Leapin’ Leachie, Zoo 
Med, Lugarti 
Best feeder insects for leachie geckos: crickets, dubia roaches, discoid roaches, grasshoppers/locusts 
Pinky mice and small lizards such as house geckos can be used as occasionally (<1x/month) treats. 
The key to providing a healthy, balanced diet for your pet is VARIETY. Provide as varied of a diet as you 
possibly can, and you will be rewarded with a healthier pet that always looks forward to mealtime. I 
prefer to use a rotation of at least 3 different kinds/flavors of CGD. 
Supplements 
Crested gecko diet is already fortified and balanced with a variety of vitamins and minerals. However, 
feeder insects need to be “dusted” with a light coating of calcium powder to balance the calcium-
phosphorus ratio. 
There are many options, but Arcadia CalciumPro Mg or Miner-All Outdoor are both solid calcium 
supplements. For best results, use as directed by the label. 
Drinking Water 
Although your gecko will get drinking water from daily mistings, it’s best to always keep a bowl of clean 
water available on the feeding ledge. This bowl should be scrubbed out with veterinary disinfectant 
weekly for good hygiene. 
